MusicGlove: Motivating and Quantifying Hand Movement
Rehabilitation by using Functional Grips to Play Music
Nizan Friedman, Vicky Chan, Danny Zondervan, Mark Bachman, Member, IEEE, and David J.
Reinkensmeyer, Member, IEEE
Abstract— People with stroke typically must perform much
of their hand exercise at home without professional assistance
as soon as two weeks after the stroke. Without feedback and
encouragement, individuals often lose motivation to practice
using the affected hand, and this disuse contributes to further
declines in hand function. We developed the MusicGlove as a
way to facilitate and motivate at home practice of hand
movement. This low-cost device uses music as an interactive
and motivating medium to guide hand exercise and to
quantitatively assess hand movement recovery. It requires the
user to practice functional movements, including pincer grip,
key-pinch grip, and finger-thumb opposition, by using those
movements to play different musical notes, played along to
songs displayed by an interactive computer game. We report
here the design of the glove and the results of a single-session
experiment with 10 participants with chronic stroke. We found
that the glove is well suited for use by people with an
impairment level quantified by a Box and Blocks score of at
least around 7; that the glove can be used to obtain a measure
of hand dexterity (% of notes hit) that correlates strongly with
the Box and Blocks score; and that the incorporation of music
into training significantly improved both objective measures of
hand motor performance and self-ratings of motivation for
training in the single session.
I. INTRODUCTION
Stroke remains the leading cause of chronic adult
disability in Western countries with over four million
survivors currently living in the United States [1]. Following
the onset of stroke, up to 85% of patients exhibit initial hand
motor impairment for the first few weeks, and up to 75% six
months post initial assessment [2]-[4]. Intensive movement
training can reduce motor impairment after stroke [5].
Unfortunately, the length of stay at inpatient rehabilitation
facilities is now often limited to two weeks and outpatient
Manuscript received March 23, 2011. The project described was
supported by NIH-R01HD062744-01 from NCMRR and Grant Number
UL1 RR031985 from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR),
a component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the NIH
Roadmap for Medical Research.
N. Friedman is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92617 USA (e-mail:
friedman@uci.edu)
V. Chan is with Rehabilitation Services, University of California at
Irvine Medical Center, Irvine, CA 92697 USA (e-mail: vchan2@uci.edu).
M. Bachman is with the department of Electrical and Computer Science
and the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92617 USA (e-mail: mbachman@uci.edu
D. J. Reinkensmeyer is with the Department of Anatomy and
Neurobiology, the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
and the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697 USA (e-mail: dreinken@uci.edu)
physical therapy to two times a week thereafter [6]. Patients
are therefore expected to perform intensive therapy at home
with little direct supervision during the time window when
the brain is most plastic [7]. Current home hand therapy
typically consists of patients following through written
sheets of exercises [8]. Without feedback and a motivating
context for exercise, people often cease exercising the hand.
Repetitive massed practice of movements and the
intensity of movement are two of the most important factors
for regaining motor function [9]-[11]. Music is a promising
avenue for therapy because of its highly repetitive and
motivating nature [9], [12]. Moreover, music therapy has
been hypothesized to induce better cortical connectivity and
improve motor cortex activation [9], [13]. Recognizing these
potential benefits, several forms of music based therapy have
emerged which focus on movement repetition and auditory
feedback about movement precision [9], [12], [14].
Corresponding Notes
Fig. 1 a.) The five hand movements trained using MusicGlove, shown in
three frames each progressing from beginning to end of the movement.
When the user touches the thumb lead to one of the other 5 electrical leads,
a distinct event is sent to the computer through the USB port b.) The
MusicGlove interfaces with a computer game called FOF. In the game,
colored notes scroll down the screen on five distinct frets. When the notes
reach the bottom of the screen, the user must touch one of the five
respective leads on the glove with their thumb within a 300 ms time frame.
Hitting the note increases the volume of the music. Correct notes are logged
and displayed in a summary at the end of the level providing a quantitative
assessment of hand function.
978-1-4244-4122-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE 2359
33rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE EMBS
Boston, Massachusetts USA, August 30 - September 3, 2011
Technology for music-based therapy of hand movement is
also emerging. For example, one study used a customized
electronic keyboard and drum pad designed to train both fine
as well as gross hand movement [9]. In another study,
participants used a robotic and virtual system to play a
simulated piano with the intent of training hand function
[16]. Although these devices promote recovery of hand
function, they do not specifically train the hand movements
used in activities of daily living (ADLs).
Our working hypothesis is that a musical training device
that focuses on training functional hand movements will be
more effective than a device that does not train such
movements, due to the principle of specificity of motor
training [17]. In other words, we hypothesize that people
will improve function more if they practice the actual
movements required for function.
We therefore developed MusicGlove as a low cost device
(< $100) for home hand rehabilitation. MusicGlove uses
music as an interactive and motivating medium for therapy
and to gain a quantitative assessment of the user’s progress.
In addition, we designed MusicGlove to require performance
of functional gripping movements to play musical notes;
these movements include pincer grip, key-pinch grip, and
finger-thumb opposition.
The device presented here is similar to another glove
based hand therapy device known as the HandTutor [18].
However, based on the published report of its use, the
HandTutor does not appear to be focused on using musical
training for therapy. The HandTutor also focuses on finger
range of motion exercises rather than on having the user
complete pinch and grasp functions that are used in many
ADLs.
This paper describes the design of the MusicGlove and the
results of initial single-session testing with the device. In this
testing, we sought to understand what level of impairment
the device was suited to treat; whether the quantitative
measurements from the glove correlated with clinical scales
of hand function; and whether people found the musical
context for therapy motivating.
II. METHODS
A. Device Design
MusicGlove is composed of a glove designed to train
functional hand movements through interactive music-based
computer games.
1) Glove
The glove contains six electrical leads located on all five
fingertips and one on the proximal interphalangeal joint on
the lateral aspect of the index finger. When the lead on the
thumb touches any of the other five leads, an electrical
connection is closed which is then registered by the
computer as an event. The placement of the electrical leads
forces the patient to engage in pinch and grasp motions
associated with activities of daily living (ADLs), as well as
thumb-finger opposition [19].
We have initially designed MusicGlove to be used to play
music on a pentatonic scale, common in Rock and Blues
music. Fig. 1a shows the five movements that correspond to
the five musical notes. It is possible to incorporate more
notes by combining finger movements or placing more
leads, or by using sensing of hand orientation to influence
note selection.
2) USB-Controller
A USB-controller was built to interface the glove with a
computer. A PIC18F14K50 microcontroller sends a unique
output to the computer corresponding to each of the five
digital inputs it receives.
B. Software
The MusicGlove is interfaced with a modified version of
Frets on Fire (FOF)—an open source computer game similar
to Guitar Hero©. During this game, five distinct notes scroll
from the top to bottom of the screen (Fig 1b). When a note
touches the stars at the bottom of the screen, the user has a
300ms window to touch the thumb to the specific electrical
lead associated with that note. Each note is synchronized
with a song in order to create the perception of playing the
song with the glove. The goal of the game is to correctly hit
as many notes as possible by the end of the level.
In order to use FOF for hand rehabilitation, several
modifications were made to the source code. First, the
graphical user interface and song selection were
reconfigured towards people over age 50, as this is the
predominant age range for people with stroke. When
developing the songs, the difficulty level of each song was
also configured to match the skill level of individuals with
different levels of hand impairment. Moreover, the computer
game was modified to enable both user and therapist to gain
a quantitative assessment of motor function at the end of
each song. The MusicGlove quantitative assessment shows:
the number of correct notes hit on each fret, total number of
correct notes hit, and an average of how close in time the
individual was to hitting the note at the correct time.
Specifically, the timing term is calculated as:
(1)
Where X = deviation in time of a correctly hit note (has to be
within 300ms window to be considered correct), and n = the
total number of correctly hit notes in a level.
